Magnifying the importance of community watchdogs, student-journalists from Cavite State University and other local institutions gathered for “24:00 The Timely and Timeless Duties of Filipino Journalists,” International Convention Center, May 26. 

Different speakers from the media industry tackled the role of Filipino journalists on being vigilant in the current political and social issues such as corruption in government, rampant disinformation campaign, environmental action, and stories of both labor and peasant class.      

In the first session, Mark Saludes, News Producer and Safety Officer of AlterMidya Network, explained the concept of community watchdog as the duty of journalists to oversee the people in power on behalf of the citizens—reiterating the responsibility of student journalists in maintaining checks and balances in their own community amidst constant restraints. 

“Totoong nasa constant state of fear tayo [journalist], kaya mas magandang maging mas mapangahas tayo… pag wala kasing pushback, para saan pa yung mga publication?” Saludes added in an exclusive interview with The Gazette. 

Subsequently, Michael Delizo, senior journalist of ABS-CBN News, emphasized the difference between a social media reporter who simply reports unverified first-hand accounts and a journalist who is committed and bound by principles of ethics, truth and social responsibility. 

Delizo also pointed out the need for a much stricter and sharper judgment in editing social media content in order to prioritize facts, integrity and accuracy amidst challenges brought by Artificial Intelligence and disinformation. 

“Mas maganda yung medyo na-delay ka, but at least na-verify mo; na-cross check mo yung sources mo,” Delizo underscores the importance of reliability in online reports over speed in uploading it. 

Timeless Stories

“Hindi tayo, as journalist, isolated from the experiences ng mga biktima ng mga specific climate disasters,” Mariejo Ramos, Southeast Asia Correspondent from Thomson Reuters Foundation, highlights the importance of Filipino journalists’ reports on environmental action.

Ramos further clarified in her talk that the role of a journalist in climate reporting is not just telling stories of communities but also showcasing the solutions sought by the people to address problems. 

Lastly, filmmaker Joanne Cesario introduced a new approach to documentary filmmaking which prioritizes truth, seeks societal changes, and promotes collaboration between the participants, crew and filmmakers to avoid exploitation and abusive working conditions.

“Hindi lahat ng documentary ay naglalahad ng katotohanan. Kaya natin ine-emphasize na kung ang documentary ay tool for truth-telling; nakabatay ‘yun sa framework or sa pulitika na pinaniniwalaan mo,” Cesario added. 

After the seminar, the annual Gabi ng Parangal commenced, premiering six documentary short films which served as fourth-year journalism students’ final output for JOUR 135: Special Project. 

“Ginagawa namin ‘yung work namin as if we were a professional na kahit na student journalists palang kami, we always make sure na what we deliver is authentic,” said Angelu de Guzman, second-year Journalism student, when asked how she will apply what she learned in the seminar. [G]