<b>After receiving reports of public interference and uncontrolled products, student vendors stationed near the College of Arts and Sciences and  Old College of Economics, Management and Development Studies building were relocated to University Mall (U-Mall), Apr. 21.</b> 

In a press conference on Apr. 26, Kabsuhenyong Samahan ng mga Manggagawa, Manlilikha at Manininda (KASAMA3) said the Office of Vice President for Business and Resource Generation (OVPBARG) gave student vendors a space inside the U-Mall after receiving information about interfering pedestrians and causing traffic. 

OVPBARG and KASAMA3 both said food concessionaires in Saluysoy protested about the unfairness, stating they are paying rent monthly to the university and strictly adhering to food safety regulations. 

“Lahat ng ating mga concessionaire na nandito sa U-mall, Saluysoy, Old Marketing meron silang mga policies ng university about food safety and handling na kailangan nilang i-follow, so ang nangyayari hindi covered ang mga students,”  Vice President for Business and Resource Generation Almira Magcawas said in an interview. 

After the relocation, KASAMA3 Vice President Dan Francis de Castro acknowledged the sudden decline in sales of student food vendors and further encouraged students to continue supporting them in their new spots. 

“Unlike Batibot na halos centerpoint ng lahat ng colleges, lahat papasok pauwi nadadaanan ‘yon, ‘yung sa U-Mall hindi masyado kaya less po talaga ang kinikita ng mga student vendors,” de Castro reiterated.  

In an interview with The Gazette, Jerlyn May Sumingcan, a student vendor, said she had reduced her stock of donuts and graham balls while already anticipating sales to go down. 

“Nagbawas na kasi ako ng number of products in a day, one-fourth ng usual number of products nalang ang binebenta ko sa U-Mall,” Sumingcan said.  

Madi Lyn Calimlim, who also sells donuts and empanadas, attested to the lack of sales in U-Mall as well, stating how students are more likely to buy heavy meals instead of snacks because of the distance from their classrooms to U-Mall. 

“Walang bayad nga ang pagtitinda sa U-Mall, pero wala rin kaming kita. Kulang pa sa kapital at lugi,” Calimlim said. 

Further, KASAMA3 plans to continue discussions between the offices, concessionaires, and student vendors to craft a policy that will cater for all parties involved, such as seminars and proper training for their members. 

“Rest assured that our food vendor members are preparing their products with utmost standard and safety…These formal trainings will serve as objective evidence that can quell valid concerns that [had been] raised,” de Castro affirmed.

Consequently, KASAMA3 submitted an activity proposal for student vendors to continue selling their products inside the university while the organization is still finding alternative spots for non-food student vendors to prevent further complaints.  

“Wala naman kaming ginagawang mali….Kailangan pa namin magtinda para lang magpatuloy sa pang-araw araw na pantustos financially. Samantalang sila [administration] ay hindi pinaghahati nang sabay ang katawan makatapos lang sa pag-aaral,” Calimlim added. <b>[G]</b>